>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JULY 31:
CAMPAIGN 2016: ARE STATE AND
LOCAL ELECTION SYSTEMS
VULNERABLE TO HACKERS?
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM
OHIO, INACTIVE VOTERS PURGED
FROM THE VOTER REGISTRY.
AND TURKEY'S PRESIDENT
CONTINUES TO TIGHTEN CONTROL
OVER THE MILITARY FOLLOWING THE
FAILED COUP.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE WAR OF WORDS BETWEEN
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE
DONALD TRUMP AND THE PARENTS OF
A DECORATED MUSLIM AMERICAN
SOLDIER WHO DIED IN COMBAT
ESCALATED TODAY.
THE FATHER OF THE U.S. ARMY
CAPTAIN WHO WAS KILLED IN IRAQ
IN 2004 AND WHO DENOUNCED TRUMP
AT LAST WEEK'S DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL CONVENTION CRITICIZED
TRUMP AGAIN TODAY.
>> HE IS A BLACK SOUL, AND THIS
IS TOTALLY UNFIT FOR THE
LEADERSHIP OF THIS COUNTRY.
THE LOVE AND AFFECTION THAT WE
HAVE RECEIVED AFFIRMS THAT OUR
GRIEF-- THAT OUR EXPERIENCE IN
THIS COUNTRY HAS BEEN CORRECT
AND POSITIVE.
>> Sreenivasan: AT THE
CONVENTION, KHAZIR KHAN, FATHER
OF CAPTAIN HUMAYUN KHAN,
ADDRESSED TRUMP DIRECTLY, SAYING
"YOU HAVE SACRIFICED NOTHING AND
NO ONE," AND ASKING IF HE HAS
READ THE U.S. CONSTITUTION.
IN AN INTERVIEW ON ABC, TRUMP
REJECTED THE ACCUSATION.
>> I'VE MADE A LOT OF
SACRIFICES.
I WORK VERY, VERY HARD.
I'VE CREATED THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OF JOBS, TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF JOBS, BUILT GREAT
STRUCTURES.
>> Sreenivasan: TRUMP ALSO TOOK
TO TWITTER TODAY TO RESPOND TO
THE CONTROVERSY.
"CAPTAIN KHAN, KILLED 12 YEARS
AGO, WAS A HERO, BUT THIS IS
ABOUT RADICAL ISLAMIC TERROR AND
THE WEAKNESS OF OUR "LEADERS" TO
ERADICATE IT!
I WAS VICIOUSLY ATTACKED BY MR.
KHAN AT THE DEMOCRATIC
CONVENTION.
AM I NOT ALLOWED TO RESPOND?
HILLARY VOTED FOR THE IRAQ WAR,
NOT ME!"
TRUMP ALSO HAS QUESTIONED WHY
CAPTAIN KHAN'S MOTHER STOOD
SILENTLY AT HER HUSBAND'S SIDE
AT THE CONVENTION.
TODAY, SHE RESPONDED IN A
WASHINGTON POST OPINION PIECE,
SAYING IN PART: "WITHOUT SAYING
A THING, ALL THE WORLD, ALL
AMERICA, FELT MY PAIN. I AM A
GOLD STAR MOTHER.
WHOEVER SAW ME FELT ME IN THEIR
HEART."
MEANWHILE, IN ANOTHER SIMMERING
CONTROVERSY, DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE HILLARY
CLINTON HAS LAID DIRECT BLAME
FOR THE RECENT HACK OF
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE
COMPUTERS ON RUSSIA.
>> WE KNOW THAT RUSSIAN
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES, WHICH ARE
PART OF THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT
AND UNDER THE FIRM CONTROL OF
VLADIMIR PUTIN, HACKED INTO THE
D.N.C. AND WE KNOW THAT THEY
ARRANGED FOR A LOT OF THOSE
EMAILS TO BE RELEASED AND WE
KNOW THAT DONALD TRUMP HAS SHOWN
A VERY TROUBLING WILLINGNESS TO
BACK UP PUTIN, TO SUPPORT PUTIN.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CLINTON
CAMPAIGN IS WRAPPING UP ITS RUST
BELT BUS TOUR TODAY IN COLUMBUS,
OHIO.
DONALD TRUMP WILL CAMPAIGN IN
OHIO AND PENNSYLVANIA TOMORROW.
MUSLIMS THROUGHOUT FRANCE
ATTENDED CATHOLIC MASS YESTERDAY
AND TODAY TO PAY TRIBUTE TO A
PRIEST KILLED BY ISLAMIC
RADICALS IN A KNIFE ATTACK
EARLIER THIS WEEK.
FATHER JACQUES HAMEL, AN 85 YEAR
OLD CATHOLIC PRIEST, WAS KILLED
IN HIS CHURCH NEAR ROUEN IN
NORMANDY BY TWO MEN WHO HAD
PLEDGED THEIR ALLEGIANCE TO
ISIS.
THE KILLERS WERE SHOT TO DEATH
BY POLICE.
THE FRENCH MUSLIM COMMUNITY
COUNCIL HAD URGED MUSLIMS
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY TO JOIN
CATHOLICS IN SOLIDARITY AS THEY
PAY TRIBUTE TO THE SLAIN PRIEST.
MEANWHILE POPE FRANCIS WRAPPED
UP A FIVE DAY VISIT TO POLAND
WITH A MASSIVE OUTDOOR SERVICE
NEAR KRAKOW.
THE POPE ENCOURAGED HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF YOUNG PEOPLE
GATHERED TO MARK WORLD YOUTH DAY
TO "BELIEVE IN A NEW HUMANITY".
TURKEY'S PRESIDENT RECEP TAYYIP
ERDOGAN MOVED TODAY TO FURTHER
TIGHTEN HIS GOVERNMENT'S CONTROL
OF THE ARMED FORCES FOLLOWING
THIS MONTH'S FAILED MILITARY
COUP.
ERDOGAN FIRED 1,400 SOLDIERS,
SAILORS AND AIRMEN, INCLUDING
HIS OWN CHIEF MILITARY ADVISER,
FOR SUSPECTED LINKS TO U.S.-
BASED CLERIC FETHULLAH GULEN,
ACCUSED BY ERDOGAN OF
MASTERMINDING THE ABORTIVE COUP.
ERDOGAN ALSO ABOLISHED ALL
MILITARY ACADEMIES, STACKED THE
TOP MILITARY COUNCIL WITH
CIVILIANS, AND SAID HE AND THE
PRIME MINISTER WILL HAVE DIRECT
AUTHORITY OVER THE ARMED FORCES.
JUST HOW FAR WILL ERDOGAN'S
CRACKDOWN GO?
JOINING US VIA SKYPE FROM
ISTANBUL IS WALL STREET JOURNAL
REPORTER DION NISSENBAUM.
THIS SHAKE UP IN THE MILITARY
IS HAPPENING AT A TIME WHEN
NATO ALLIES ARE WONDERING,
WAIT, WHO IS ACTUALLY IN
CHARGE, WHO DO I HAVE A
RELATIONSHIP WITH THAT I CAN
TRUST.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THERE IS ACTUALLY TWO WARS GOING
ON ON THE BORDER WITH TURKEY.
YOU HAVE TURKEY'S OWN WAR WITH
KURDISH MILITANTS AND ONE OF THE
COUP PLOTTERS, WAS ACTUALLY
OVERSEEING THAT WAR.
AND THEN YOU HAVE THE WAR
AGAINST ISLAMIC STATE AND THE
GENERAL AT THE AIR BASE WHICH IS
THE MAIN BASE WHERE THE U.S.
USES TO CARRY OUT STRIKES
AGAINST ISLAMIC STATE HE WAS
ARRESTED AS WELL.
THERE ARE TANKERS USED FROM THAT
BASE TO REFUEL SOME OF THE JET
FIGHTERS USED IN THE COUP PLOT.
YOU HAVE U.S. MILITARY SAYING,
HOW MUCH IS THIS GOING TO IMPACT
OUR FIGHT.
THEY ARE SEEING AN IMPACT
ALREADY, BUT IT'S A LITTLE BIT
TOO EARLY TO SAY, IF THEY WILL
BE A MEASURABLE OR LONG-TERM
IMPACT.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'VE HEARD
DIFFERENT REPORTS, WE'VE HEARD
SOME DETENTIONS, WE'VE HEARD
SOME ARRESTS.
WE'VE HEARD SOME PEOPLE RELEASE
UNDERSTAND THEY ARE OUT IF
THEY'RE NOT DETAINED, IS THERE A
POSSIBILITY THAT THEY DECIDE TO
KIND OF GROUP TEXT EACH OTHER
AND FORM THE EQUIVALENT OF, YOU
KNOW, A MOVEMENT AGAINST
ERDOGAN.
>> IT'S DIFFICULT TO TELL, WE'RE
UNDER A STATE OF EMERGENCY HERE
IN TURKEY UP TO THREE MONTHS
MAYBE LONGER DEPENDING HOW IT
GOES.
THE CRACKDOWN HERE HAS BEEN
WIDESPREAD, 10,000 PEOPLE
ARRESTED.
UP TO 70,000 PEOPLE HAVE LOST
THEIR JOBS, SUSPENDED OR
DISMISSED.
THERE IS, I'D SAY A BROAD FEAR
RIGHT NOW ABOUT THIS CRACKDOWN,
JOURNALISTS HAVE FLED THE
COUNTRY, PASSPORTS HAVE BEEN
CANCELLED.
THERE ISN'T A LOT OF SPACE HERE,
I WOULD SAY, FOR POLITICAL
OPPOSITION AGAINST PRESIDENT
ERDOGAN THERE WAS SOME SPACE
BEFORE THE COUP, NOW THAT IT'S
BEEN PUT DOWN IT'S GIVEN
PRESIDENT ERDOGAN TO SUPPRESS
FORWARD WITH WHAT HE REALLY
WANTS IN THIS COUNTRY WHICH IS
AN EXECUTIVE AMERICAN-STYLE
PRESIDENCY, PUTTING ALL OF THE
RESOURCES UNDER HIS CONTROL.
AS YOU MENTIONED AT THE
BEGINNING, DOING THAT NOW, TODAY
WITH THE MILITARY.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THESE DIFFERENT MILITARY
ACADEMIES, WHY ARE THOUGH SO
IMPORTANT TO TRY TO PURGE OR TO
RETAIN UNDER HIS CONTROL?
>> IT'S AN INTERESTING QUESTION.
THE NOTION HERE BY THE
GOVERNMENT IS THAT THE PEOPLE
WHO PLAN THE COUP WAS LED BY THE
CLERIC AS YOU MENTIONED.
AND HE'S KNOWN FOR ESSENTIAL SHE
FEEDING PEOPLE THROUGHOUT THE
GOVERNMENT.
SO, I GUESS THE SUSPICIONS WITH
THE MILITARY ACADEMY IS THAT
IT'S FILLED WITH THESE PEOPLE
THAT ARE LOYAL NOT TO TURKEY BUT
TO FETHULLAH GULEN THEY MUST
FEEL LIKE THEY MUST WIPE THE
SLATE CLEAN AND START AGAIN.
IT'S JUST HAPPENED TODAY SO WE
DON'T HAVE A LOT OF THE RATIONAL
FOR WHY THEIR CLOSING THE
ACADEMIES.
THAT WOULD BE MY GUESS.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING US
VIA SKYPE FROM ISTANBUL OF THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL."
THANKS SO MUCH S.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS ELECTION
SEASON, OHIO-- AS ALWAYS--
FIGURES TO BE A KEY PRESIDENTIAL
BATTLEGROUND; A DIVERSE STATE
THAT SWINGS BACK AND FORTH
BETWEEN THE TWO MAJOR PARTIES.
NO REPUBLICAN HAS EVER WON THE
WHITE HOUSE WITHOUT WINNING
OHIO, AND NEITHER HAS ANY
DEMOCRAT SINCE 1960.
WITH THE STAKES SO HIGH, A
SERIES OF LEGAL SKIRMISHES
REVEALS BOTH PARTIES MANEUVERING
FOR MAXIMUM ADVANTAGE AT THE
POLLS IN NOVEMBER.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT CHRIS BURY
REPORTS FROM COLUMBUS.
>> Reporter: LARRY HARMON, A
LIFELONG OHIOAN WHO HAS LIVED IN
THE SAME HOUSE NEAR AKRON FOR 16
YEARS, NEVER GAVE HIS VOTING
REGISTRATION A SECOND THOUGHT.
>> I'VE BEEN VOTING SINCE 1976.
A COUPLE OF TIMES I DIDN'T VOTE.
IF I FELT I WASN'T UP ON THE
ISSUES OR I COULDN'T REALLY
DECIDE WHO WAS WORSE OF THE TWO
CANDIDATES, I JUST WOULDN'T
VOTE.
>> Reporter: HARMON VOTED IN THE
2008 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, BUT
SAT OUT THE 2012 RACE.
THEN, LAST NOVEMBER, THE 59 YEAR
OLD SOFTWARE ENGINEER AND NAVY
VETERAN ARRIVED AT HIS POLLING
PLACE-- THIS HIGH SCHOOL-- TO
VOTE ON A BALLOT INITIATIVE
THAT, HE WORRIED, WOULD ALLOW
MONOPOLIES TO CONTROL LEGALIZED
MARIJUANA IN OHIO.
>> I WENT DOWN THERE TO VOTE
AGAINST IT, AND MY NAME WASN'T
ON THE LIST, AND I COULDN'T
VOTE.
>> Reporter: HARMON WAS REMOVED
FROM THE ROLLS OF ELIGIBLE
VOTERS IN 2015, BECAUSE HE HAD
NOT VOTED IN THE PREVIOUS SIX
YEARS.
WHEN IT COMES TO THE RIGHT TO
VOTE, OHIO IS A "USE IT, OR LOSE
IT" STATE.
JUST LAST YEAR, OHIO'S 20 MOST
POPULOUS COUNTIES PURGED MORE
THAN 200,000 INACTIVE VOTERS,
ACCORDING TO RESEARCH BY PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
IN OHIO'S LARGEST COUNTY,
CUYAHOGA, WITH HEAVILY
DEMOCRATIC CLEVELAND, NEARLY
52,000 VOTERS WERE PURGED.
>> I THOUGHT, ' ¡WELL, JEEZ. YOU
KNOW I PAY MY TAXES EVERY YEAR,
AND I PAY MY PROPERTY TAXES, AND
I REGISTER MY CAR. SO THE STATE
HAD TO KNOW I'M STILL A VOTER.'
WHY SHOULD WE FIGHT FOR THE
COUNTRY IF THEY'RE GONNA BE
TAKING AWAY MY RIGHTS?
I MEAN, I'M A VETERAN, MY
FATHER'S A VETERAN, MY
GRANDFATHER'S A VETERAN, NOW
THEY AREN'T GIVING ME MY RIGHT
TO VOTE, THE MOST FUNDAMENTAL
RIGHT I HAVE?
I JUST CAN'T BELIEVE IT.
>> Reporter: IN OHIO, THE
SECRETARY OF STATE SENT OUT THIS
FORM WARNING VOTERS WHO HAVE NOT
CAST BALLOTS IN TWO YEARS TO
CONFIRM THEIR ELIGIBILITY OR
RISK HAVING THEIR VOTING
REGISTRATIONS CANCELED.
THE PRACTICE HAS BEEN STATE LAW
UNDER DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS
FOR MORE THAN 20 YEARS.
OHIO SECRETARY OF STATE JON
HUSTED, A REPUBLICAN WHO SERVED
TWO TERMS AS SPEAKER OF OHIO'S
STATEHOUSE, HAS INCREASED
ENFORCEMENT OF THE PRACTICE.
AS SECRETARY OF STATE, IS IT
YOUR MISSION TO ENSURE THAT AS
MANY PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE VOTE IN
OHIO?
>> MY GOAL IS TO STRIKE THE
BALANCE BETWEEN MAKING IT EASY
TO VOTE AND HARD TO CHEAT.
>> Reporter: HUSTED SAYS IT'S
HIS LEGAL DUTY IS TO MAKE SURE
VOTING ROLLS STAY UP TO DATE AND
DON'T BECOME BLOATED WITH VOTERS
WHO'VE DIED OR RESIDENTS WHO'VE
LEFT OHIO LIKE COLLEGE STUDENTS.
DON'T I HAVE THE RIGHT TO VOTE
WHENEVER I CHOOSE?
IF I DON'T WANT TO VOTE FOR 20
YEARS, ISN'T THAT PERFECTLY
FINE?
>> IT'S PERFECTLY FINE IF YOU
DON'T.
BUT YOU JUST HAVE TO RE-
REGISTER.
>> Reporter: HUSTED SAYS THE
STATE MAINTAINS THE ACCURACY OF
ITS VOTING LIST IN TWO WAYS.
FIRST, BY USING THE NATIONAL
POST OFFICE DATABASE.
BUT MANY PEOPLE DON'T REGISTER
THEIR NEW ADDRESSES WHEN THEY
MOVE.
THAT'S WHEN THE SECOND PROCESS--
KNOWN AS PURGING--KICKS IN.
>> YOU'RE INACTIVE FOR TWO
YEARS, MEANING THAT YOU'VE NOT
VOTED, YOU'VE NOT DONE ANYTHING,
WE SEND YOU A CARD TO SAY, "HEY,
ARE YOU STILL REGISTERED TO
VOTE?" AND, "ARE YOU STILL
LIVING AT THIS ADDRESS?"
>> Reporter: TO STAY ON THE
VOTER ROLLS, RESIDENTS HAVE FOUR
YEARS TO RESPOND TO THE LETTER
AND CONFIRM THEIR ADDRESS, OR
SIMPLY VOTE, OR THEY CAN SIGN A
PETITION-- THE KIND THAT
REQUIRES SIGNATURES FROM
REGISTERED VOTERS.
HARMON SAYS HE DOESN'T REMEMBER
RECEIVING THE FORM IN THE MAIL.
SO AFTER BEING TURNED AWAY FROM
HIS POLLING PLACE LAST YEAR, HE
JOINED A LAWSUIT BROUGHT BY THE
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
AND THE PUBLIC POLICY GROUP
DEMOS AGAINST SECRETARY OF STATE
HUSTED, CHALLENGING OHIO'S PURGE
PROCESS.
ATTORNEY DAN TOKAJI, WHO'S A CO-
COUNSEL ON THE LAWSUIT, SAYS
OHIO'S LAW VIOLATES THE NATIONAL
VOTER REGISTRATION ACT OF 1993,
BETTER KNOWN AS THE MOTOR VOTER
BILL, WHICH REQUIRES STATES TO
IMPROVE OPPORTUNITIES TO
REGISTER TO VOTE, SUCH AS WHEN
APPLYING FOR A DRIVER'S LICENSE.
>> IF THE STATE HAS OTHER
REASONS FOR BELIEVING SOMEBODY
HAS MOVED, FOR EXAMPLE, IF THEY
GET INFORMATION FROM THE POST
OFFICE INDICATING THAT THAT
PERSON'S ADDRESS HAS CHANGED, IT
CAN INITIATE THE PROCESS FOR
REMOVING VOTERS.
WHAT NEITHER OHIO NOR ANY OTHER
STATE CAN DO IS TO INITIATE THE
PURGE PROCESS SOLELY BECAUSE OF
A REGISTERED VOTER'S FAILURE TO
VOTE.
>> Reporter: BUT OHIO DID.
SIX OTHER STATES-- ALASKA,
MONTANA, SOUTH DAKOTA,
TENNESSEE, GEORGIA, AND WEST
VIRGINIA-- ALSO CONSIDER VOTER
INACTIVITY WHEN STRIKING NAMES
FROM LISTS OF REGISTERED VOTERS.
DO MANY OF THESE FOLKS NOT KNOW
THAT THEY HAVE BEEN PURGED?
>> MANY OF THEM WILL NOT REALIZE
THAT THEY'VE ACTUALLY BEEN
REMOVED FROM THE ROLLS UNTIL
THEY GO TO VOTE.
WE THINK THAT THE BIGGEST IMPACT
IS GOING TO BE FELT IN URBAN
AREAS, ESPECIALLY PLACES WHERE
YOU'VE GOT LESS AFFLUENT VOTERS.
>> OHIO HAS REMOVED INFREQUENT
VOTERS OFF THE VOTER ROLL.
>> Reporter: COMMUNITY ORGANIZER
ANDRE WASHINGTON IS SPREADING
THE WORD ABOUT OHIO'S VOTING
RULES AT TRIEDSTONE BAPTIST
CHURCH, ONE OF COLUMBUS'S
LARGEST PREDOMINANTLY BLACK
CHURCHES.
HE HAS ALSO JOINED THE LAWSUIT
AGAINST THE SECRETARY OF STATE.
>> MOST OF THE PEOPLE THAT THEY
PURGED LOOK LIKE ME AND YOU.
>> Reporter: WASHINGTON FEARS
OHIO'S PURGE PRACTICE WILL
DISENFRANCHISE AFRICAN-AMERICANS
WHO HAVE NOT VOTED SINCE 2008,
WHEN THEY HELPED ELECT THE FIRST
BLACK PRESIDENT.
SO, AFTER SUNDAY SERVICES, THESE
VOLUNTEERS HELPED CONGREGANTS
CHECK THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S
PUBLIC RECORDS TO SEE IF THEY'RE
STILL REGISTERED.
>> IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT
THESE PEOPLE THAT WERE PURGED
GET PUT BACK ON THE ROLLS SO
THAT THEY CAN EXERCISE THEIR
RIGHT TO VOTE.
BECAUSE ONE OF THE JOBS OF THE
SECRETARY OF STATE IS TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE BALLOT BOX IS
ACCESSIBLE TO ALL CITIZENS OF
OHIO.
AND MAKE SURE IT'S EASIER FOR
THEM TO VOTE, NOT HARDER FOR
THEM TO VOTE.
>> Reporter: DOES THIS POLICY
DISENFRANCHISE POOR AFRICAN-
AMERICANS?
>> IT ACTUALLY HAS NO RACE,
GENDER, ETHNICITY COMPONENT TO
IT, BECAUSE IT TREATS EVERY
SINGLE VOTER EXACTLY THE SAME.
AND REMEMBER, IF YOU RECEIVE ONE
OF THESE CARDS, IT'S BECAUSE YOU
HAVEN'T VOTED.
>> Reporter: YOU DON'T THINK
IT'S AN UNFAIR BURDEN, REQUIRING
PEOPLE WHO HAVEN'T VOTED FOR A
WHILE TO MAKE SOME KIND OF
AFFIRMATIVE STATEMENT?
>> THE LAW SAYS IT'S SIX YEARS.
THE FEDERAL COURT AGREEMENT SAYS
IT'S SIX YEARS.
I CAN UNDERSTAND PEOPLE WHO HAVE
POLICY DISAGREEMENTS.
IF YOU WANT TO MAKE IT LONGER,
CHANGE THE LAW I'LL FOLLOW THE
LAW.
>> Reporter: OHIO'S PURGE OF
INACTIVE VOTERS IS AMONG SEVERAL
ELECTION RULES UNDER FIERCE
LEGAL ATTACK HERE.
IN MAY, A FEDERAL JUDGE
REINSTATED SEVEN DAYS OF EARLY
VOTING WHEN SAME DAY
REGISTRATION IS ALSO ALLOWED,
KNOWN AS "GOLDEN WEEK."
THE REPUBLICAN STATE LEGISLATURE
ELIMINATED IT TWO YEARS AGO IN A
LAW SIGNED BY OHIO'S REPUBLICAN
GOVERNOR, JOHN KASICH, REDUCING
THE NUMBER OF EARLY VOTING DAYS
TO 28.
BUT THE JUDGE FOUND THE EARLY
VOTING ROLLBACK DISCRIMINATORY,
BECAUSE BLACK VOTERS ARE MORE
LIKELY THAN WHITE VOTERS TO CAST
BALLOTS EARLY AND IN-PERSON.
IN JUNE, ANOTHER FEDERAL JUDGE
STRUCK DOWN LAWS ALLOWING OHIO
ELECTION OFFICIALS TO USE
TRIVIAL ERRORS TO DISQUALIFY
ABSENTEE BALLOTS AND PROVISIONAL
BALLOTS-- THE ONES VOTERS FILL
OUT WHEN THEIR REGISTRATIONS ARE
CHALLENGED AT POLLING PLACES.
FOR EXAMPLE, A VOTER REGISTERED
AS "WILLIAM THOMAS SMITH" COULD
HAVE HIS ABSENTEE BALLOT
REJECTED, BECAUSE HE WROTE THE
ABBREVIATION "W.T. SMITH" OR
"BILL SMITH" ON HIS ENVELOPE.
CIVIL RIGHTS GROUPS HAD ARGUED
THOSE REJECTIONS AMOUNTED TO AN
UNCONSTITUTIONAL LITERACY TEST.
IF YOU TAKE THESE TOGETHER, YOUR
OPPONENTS WOULD ARGUE THAT THE
INTENT IS TO SUPPRESS DEMOCRATIC
VOTES.
>> WELL, THAT'S NONSENSE, AND
THEY KNOW IT IS.
MANY OF THEM HAVE ACTUALLY VOTED
FOR THE SAME POLICIES THAT I AM
ENACTING.
I ADOPT THE SAME DIRECTIVES THAT
MY DEMOCRAT PREDECESSOR WAS
USING, BUT DEMOCRATS NOW CALL
THAT VOTER SUPPRESSION.
IT'S ALMOST IN THE HISTORY OF
THE WORLD NEVER BEEN EASIER TO
VOTE ANYWHERE THAN IT IS IN OHIO
TODAY.
>> Reporter: EVER SINCE THE
BITTERLY CONTESTED 2000
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION, WHERE
LAWYERS FOUGHT OVER FLORIDA'S
DISPUTED BALLOTS ALL THE WAY TO
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT-- LEGAL
MANEUVERING OVER VOTING RULES
HAS INTENSIFIED.
FOR EXAMPLE, 17 STATES HAVE LAWS
NOW IN EFFECT REQUIRING PHOTO
IDENTIFICATION IN ORDER TO VOTE,
ALL BUT TWO OF THOSE STATES LED
BY REPUBLICANS WHEN THE LAWS
PASSED.
THE NUMBER OF LAWSUITS
NATIONWIDE OVER VOTING PRACTICES
AND RESULTS HAS ALSO
DRAMATICALLY INCREASED, FROM
ONLY 80 CASES IN 1999 TO MORE
THAN 300 IN 2014, A TREND OHIO
STATE UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR
EDWARD FOLEY CALLS "THE VOTING
WARS."
>> THE VOTING WARS IS TO USE THE
TOOLS OF THE LEGAL SYSTEM TO TRY
TO GET ONE SIDE OR THE OTHER A
LITTLE BIT OF AN ADVANTAGE ON
ELECTION DAY IN THE COUNTING OF
THE BALLOTS.
AND IT CAN BE THROUGH LAWSUITS,
OR IT CAN BE THROUGH CREATING
NEW LAWS THAT YOU THINK MIGHT BE
FAVORABLE TO YOUR SIDE.
>> Reporter: FOLEY SAYS BOTH
PARTIES ARE CONSTANTLY FIGHTING
OVER WHAT HE CALLS "THE MARGIN
OF LITIGATION"-- LEGAL
SKIRMISHES THAT COULD CHANGE
OUTCOMES IN CLOSE RACES.
>> IN BATTLEGROUND STATES, THE
CHANCES ARE THAT THE ELECTION
COULD BE REALLY CLOSE-- 1,000
VOTES COULD TIP A STATE.
SO THE RULES FOR HOW YOU COUNT
DISPUTED BALLOTS, REALLY MATTER.
COULD DETERMINE WHO WINS A STATE
LIKE OHIO.
>> Reporter: AND THE STAKES ARE
HIGH HERE.
>> STAKES ARE THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> Reporter: IN THE VOTER PURGE
CASE, LAST MONTH A FEDERAL JUDGE
RULED IN FAVOR OF SECRETARY OF
STATE HUSTED, SAYING, "THE PURGE
PROCESS DOES NOT VIOLATE THE
NATIONAL VOTER REGISTRATION
ACT...AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST IS
BEING SERVED BY THE PROCEDURE."
LAWYERS REPRESENTING LARRY
HARMON AND OTHER OHIO VOTERS
HAVE APPEALED.
AND TWO WEEKS AGO, THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ASKED THE
COURT TO REVERSE ITS DECISION.
KNOWING THE STAKES IN OHIO,
HARMON HAS ALREADY RE-
REGISTERED.
ARE YOU PLANNING TO VOTE IN THIS
NOVEMBER'S ELECTION?
>> YES, I AM.
>> Reporter: HEAR FROM YOUNG
VOTERS ABOUT THE ISSUES THAT
MATTER THE MOST TO THEM THIS
ELECTION SEASON.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THE POLITICAL
FALLOUT CONTINUES FOLLOWING THE
CYBER ATTACK INTO A PROGRAM USED
BY THE CLINTON CAMPAIGN, ALONG
WITH A RELATED HACK INTO THE
EMAILS AND VOICEMAILS OF THE
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE.
BUT IT DOES RAISE CONCERNS OVER
OTHER ASPECTS OF THE ELECTION AS
WE HEAD TOWARD NOVEMBER-- LIKE
THE SECURITY OF VOTER
REGISTRATIONS, VOTING LOCATIONS,
AND DONOR LISTS.
POLITICO NATIONAL SECURITY
REPORTER BRYAN BENDER HAS BEEN
LOOKING INTO THIS AND HAS FOUND
A PATCHWORK OF SECURITY MEASURES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
HE JOINS ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON,
D.C.
YOU AND CORY BENNETT HAD A PIECE
LOOK AT THIS HACKING BEYOND JUST
THE SPECIFIC INCIDENT, BEYOND
THE PARTIES.
LIEUTENANTS BREAK THAT DOWN.
FIRST CONCERN, DONOR.
>> Liz:, I'D IMAGINE A LOT OF
PEOPLE WOULD BE CONCERNED ABOUT
THEIR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER,
AMOUNT GIVEN TO A CANDIDATE ALL
THAT BEING OUT IN THE PUBLIC.
>> SO MANY THINGS NOW RELATED
TO THE ELECTIONS PROCESS, THE
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION PROCESS
ARE DIGITAL.
SO, IN THE CASE OF DONORS, IF
YOU GIVE MONEY TO A POLITICAL
PARTY, A GRASS ROOTS
ORGANIZATION, YOU DO SO WITH THE
IDEA THAT YOUR INFORMATION IS GO
TO BE PROTECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: CAMPAIGNS
DON'T HAVE THE EQUIVALENT OF THE
SECRET SERVICE AGENCY, NO ONE
AGENCY THAT MANAGES DIGITAL
INFORMATION OF THE CAMPAIGNS.
FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION THEY
DON'T ACTUALLY HAVE ANY OTHER
AUTHORITY.
>> A LOT OF THE ELECTION
OFFICIALS WE TALKED TO,
CYBEREXPERTS THAT WE TALK TO,
ALL POINT OUTED THAT BASICALLY
THE ELECTION SYSTEM, THE
ELECTION INDUSTRY, IF YOU WILLS
PLAYING CATCH UP WHEN IT COMES
TO THREATS FROM CYBER-SPACE.
THERE IS NO ONE GOVERNMENT
AGENCY THAT IS SUPPOSED TO
LAYOUT GUIDELINES AND HELP THESE
VERY DISPARITY ORGANIZATIONS
COME UP WITH THE RULES OF THE
ROAD THAT THE ELECTION SYSTEM,
WRONG STATION, VOTERS, ALL THAT
KIND OF INFORMATION IS PROCEED
SELECTED SCREEN ON COUNTY BY
COUNTY BASIS --
>> Sreenivasan: ON COUNTY BY
COUNTY YOU SEE DIVERSITY OF THE
TECHNOLOGY, THE OPTION, IS THAT
THEY CHOOSE.
WHAT ARE SOME THINGS THAT CAN GO
WRONG ELECTRONICALLY.
>> MANY EXPERTS POINTED TO THE
FEAR THAT VOTER REGISTRATION
INFORMATION COULD GET CORRUPTED
BY SOME MALICIOUS ACTOR ONLINE.
FOR EXAMPLE, SOMEONE COULD BREAK
IN CHANGE THE PARTY REGISTRATION
OF VOTERS.
THAT WOULD AFFECT A PRIMARY, FOR
EXAMPLE, IN MANY STATES YOU CAN
ONLY VOTE IN REPUBLICAN PRIMARY
IF YOU'RE REGISTERED AS A
REPUBLICAN.
IN OTHER CASES YOU CAN SIMPLY
DROP PEOPLE'S NAMES FROM THE
VOTER REGISTRATION ROLLS AND
MANY STACEY YOU CAN'T REGISTER
TO VOTE ON ELECTION DAY.
IF YOU SHOWED UP AT THE POLLS
THE SYSTEM SHOW THAT YOU ARE NOT
REGISTERED, WOULD YOU NOT BE
ABLE TO VOTE.
THOSE ARE JUST A COUPLE OF WAYS
THAT COULD SERIOUSLY CORRUPT THE
PROCESS, CERTAINLY CAUSE
HEADACHES.
>> Sreenivasan: ANY EXAMPLES
OF COUNTY LEVEL OR ANY KIND OF
ELECTION COMMISSION SUCCESSFULLY
THWARTING A HACK AND FIGURING
OUT WHAT WAS BEING ATTEMPTED ON
THEM?
>> WE DO KNOW THAT ILLINOIS WE
KNOW THAT ACTORS GOT INTO THE
VOTER REGISTRATION ROLLS.
AND OBVIOUSLY THAT WAS SOMETHING
THAT GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS WERE
ABLE TO TRACK, WERE ABLE TO PLUG
THE HOLES.
ONE OF THE BIG WORRIES IS THAT
HACKERS COULD DO SOME VERY
SUBTLE THINGS.
ELECTION OFFICIALS MIGHT NOT
NOTICE THEM IMMEDIATELY, IF
EVER.
I THINK THERE'S SOME WORRY THAT
SOME OF THESE ATTACKS MAY NOT BE
LARGE, THEY CAN BE VERY SMALL,
PINPRICK ATTACKS DONE IN
STRATEGIC WAY COULD HAVE IMPACT
ON THE ELECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: BRYAN BENDER,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: ONLY FIVE DAYS
BEFORE THE SUMMER OLYMPICS OPEN
IN BRAZIL, WHICH IS EXPERIENCING
AN OUTBREAK OF THE ZIKA VIRUS.
AMERICANS BOB AND MIKE BRYAN,
THE DEFENDING GOLD MEDAL TENNIS
DOUBLES TEAM, WITHDREW FROM THE
GAMES.
THEY CITED HEALTH CONCERNS FOR
THEMSELVES AND THEIR FAMILIES.
AND THE INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC
COMMITTEE SAID A THREE-PERSON
PANEL WILL MAKE THE FINAL
DECISION ON WHICH RUSSIAN
ATHLETES WILL BE ALLOWED TO
COMPETE IN THE WAKE OF A DOPING
SCANDAL.
I.T.N.'S STEVE SCOTT REPORTS
FROM RIO.
>> YOU MAY HAVE WANTED TO TALK
RIO BUT IOC PRESIDENT KNEW WHAT
WAS COMING.
QUESTION AFTER QUESTION, ON THE
RUSSIA DOPING SCANDAL.
>> THE IOC IS NOT RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE FACT THAT A DIFFERENT
INFORMATION, WHICH WAS OFFERED,
ALREADY A COUPLE OF YEARS AGO,
WAS NOT BEEN FOLLOWED UP.
>> IT'S NOW FIVE DAYS BEFORE THE
GAMES START, SEVERAL DAYS AFTER
THE MAJORITY OF RUSSIANS CLEARED
BY THEIR OWN SPORT HAVE ARRIVED
IN RIO.
WHILE MORE THAN 100 HAVE BEEN
RULED OUT, INCLUDING ALL BUT ONE
OF THE TRACK AND FIELD TEAM,
MORE THAN 200 HAVE BEEN GIVEN
THE GO AHEAD.
YET STILL, SOME OF THOSE MAY BE
SENT BACK HOME.
THIS CONFUSING, CHAOTIC
SITUATION STEMS FROM AN
INVESTIGATION THAT UNCOVERED
EYE-WATERING STATE SUPPORTED
DOPING AT RUSSIA'S OWN WINTER
GAMES.
THAT SAME INVESTIGATION ALSO
IMPLICATED A NUMBER OF SUMMER
SPORTS, TOO.
IN TURN, THAT SPARKED A NUMBER
OF FROM THE BEIJING.
AND CAUSE FOR AN OUT RIGHT
WITHIN ON RUSSIA, WHICH THE IOC
IGNORED.
IT'S PROVING AN INEVITABLE
DISTRACTION TO ALL COMPETING
TEAMS.
STEVE SCOTT, ITV NEWS.
RIO DE JANEIRO.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY,
WITH 18,000 JUMPS TO HIS NAME,
42-YEAR-OLD SKYDIVER LUKE AIKINS
THOUGHT IT TIME TO TRY SOMETHING
ELSE.
FROM AN ALTITUDE OF 25,000 FEET,
AND BEFORE A LIVE TELEVISION
AUDIENCE, HE BECAME THE FIRST
PERSON TO EVER ATTEMPT AND
SUCCESSFULLY JUMP WITHOUT A
PARACHUTE OR WING SUIT, TOWARD
THE CALIFORNIA DESERT FOR TWO
MINUTES BEFORE LANDING AT 10,000
SQUARE FOOT NET SUSPENDED NEARLY
200 FEET ABOVE THE GROUND.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS "NEWSHOUR," I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.